% !TEX root = ../main.tex
\chapter{Conclusion}
\label{chap:conclusion}

It is certain that adding constant expressions as a kind of parameter over
generic types has improved the expressiveness and ergonomy of Rust when dealing
with constant abstraction. In particular, these additions make the array types
"first class citizens" of the language, allowing to implement traits over all
its sizes and providing a safe mechanism to manipulate them with static
guarantees. These changes also allow for a more natural definition of user
defined types which have information that will not change during execution and
thus can be encoded in constant values as generic parameters.

It is expected that following this design would allow for a more performant
execution of functions dealing with statically verifiable conditions. However,
It is important to remark that this design would increase compilation time
given the complexity of verifying if a set of statements is satisfiable.

Some prospects of future work are given in the rest of this chapter.


\section{Future work}
\label{sec:future_work}

Even though \textsc{sire} is able to interpret a subset of the Rust's
\textsc{mir}, it is important to extend the coverage of \textsc{mir}
expressions. In particular, we consider of utmost adding support for panicking
functions and algebraic data types.

One of the biggest concerns of using any kind of generics is allowing generic
types that would produce unexpected behaviour after monomorphization. Checking
on which cases a function panics, would allow the compiler to avoid
monomorphization of generic types on those cases, or to at least warn the user
about them.

On the other hand, algebraic data types are needed to implement interesting
structures such as bounded integers to improve the ergonomy of type safe access
of arrays and to allow the usage of constants with types \inrust{Option<T>} and
\inrust{Result<T, E>} as type parameters.

Even though using an SMT solver makes our solution simpler in terms of
implementation, it adds an additional dependency if these changes were to be
added to the compiler. It is also true that an SMT solver is far from the
notion of zero-cost abstraction, because it would be more performant to write a
logic system to deal only with Rust's characteristic. Thus, we consider
necessary to provide an alternative verification mechanism, one option would be
to extend the chalk project to deal with these verifications.

As a final prospect, integrating this project with the compiler codebase would
allow an easier mantainment of the new features exposed on this work. This
codebase would fit under the constant evaluation modules of the compilers code,
given its closeness to miri.
